add post (#101)
rstudio/ai-blog: _posts/2020-09-01-weather-prediction/weather_prediction_deep_learning.Rmd

---
title: "An introduction to weather forecasting with deep learning"
description: > 

>   A few weeks ago, we showed how to forecast chaotic dynamical systems with deep learning, augmented by a custom constraint derived from domain-specific insight. Global weather is a chaotic system, but of much higher complexity than many tasks commonly addressed with machine and/or deep learning. In this post, we provide a practical introduction featuring a very simple deep learning baseline for atmospheric forecasting. While far away from being competitive, it serves to illustrate how more sophisticated and compute-intensive models may approach that formidable task by means of methods situated on the "black-box end" of the continuum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  A few weeks ago, we showed how to forecast chaotic dynamical systems with deep learning, augmented by a custom constraint derived from domain-specific insight. Global weather is a chaotic system, but of much higher complexity than many tasks commonly addressed with machine and/or deep learning. In this post, we provide a practical introduction featuring a simple deep learning baseline for atmospheric forecasting. While far away from being competitive, it serves to illustrate how more sophisticated and compute-intensive models may approach that formidable task by means of methods situated on the "black-box end" of the continuum.
```

Reviewer: Removed the "very" before simple (intensifiers are usually cuttable) 🙂

author:
  - name: Sigrid Keydana
    affiliation: RStudio
    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/
slug: keydanaweatherforecasting
bibliography: bibliography.bib
date: 09-01-2020
categories:
  - R
  - TensorFlow/Keras
  - Time Series
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
preview: images/thumb.png
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

With all that is going on in the world these days, is it frivolous to talk about weather prediction? Asked in the 21st

> century, this is bound to be a rhetorical question. In the 1930s, when German poet Bertolt Brecht wrote the famous lines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
century, this is bound to be a rhetorical question. In the 1930s, when German poet Bertolt Brecht wrote the famous lines:
```

> Was sind das für Zeiten, wo\
> Ein Gespräch über Bäume fast ein Verbrechen ist\
> Weil es ein Schweigen über so viele Untaten einschließt![^1]

[^1]: *An die Nachgeborenen, 1934-38.* The atrocities referred to are those of Nazi Germany.

("What kind of times are these, where a conversation about trees is almost a crime, for it means silence about so many
atrocities!"),

he couldn't have anticipated the responses he would get in the second half of that century, with trees symbolizing, as well as
literally falling victim to, environmental pollution and climate change.

Today, no lengthy justification is needed as to why prediction of atmospheric states is vital: Due to global warming,
frequency and intensity of severe weather conditions -- droughts, wildfires, hurricanes, heatwaves -- have risen and will
continue to rise. And while accurate forecasts don't change those events per se, they constitute essential information in
mitigating their consequences. This goes for atmospheric forecasts on all scales: from so-called "nowcasting" (operating on a

> range of about six hours) over medium-range (three to five days) and sub-seasonal (weekly/monthly) to climate forecasts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
range of about six hours), over medium-range (three to five days) and sub-seasonal (weekly/monthly), to climate forecasts
```

(concerned with years and decades). Medium-range forecasts especially are extremely important in acute disaster prevention.

This post will show how deep learning (DL) methods can be used to generate atmospheric forecasts, using a newly published
[benchmark dataset](https://github.com/pangeo-data/WeatherBench)[@weatherbench]. Future posts may refine the model used here
and/or discuss the role of DL ("AI") in mitigating climate change -- and its implications -- more globally. And coming back to
Bertolt Brecht: While this text may be about trees, climate change should not remain the only societal topic addressed on this

> blog.

Reviewer: I understand what you're saying here, but it feels a little out of place.

Author: You're so right of course ... I should just do it, not keep running around and telling everyone I will ;-)))

That said, let's put the current endeavor in context. In a way, we have here the usual *dejà vu* of using DL as a
black-box-like, magic instrument on a task where *human knowledge* used to be required. Of course, this characterization is

> overly dichotomizing; many choices are to be made in creating DL models, and performance is necessarily constrained by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
overly dichotomizing; many choices are made in creating DL models, and performance is necessarily constrained by
```

Reviewer: Do you mean made by humans? If so, I'd state that explicitly.

available algorithms -- which may, or may not, fit the domain to be modeled to a sufficient degree.

If you've started learning about image recognition rather recently, you may well have been using DL methods from the outset,

> and not have heard much about the rich set of feature engineering methods developed in pre-DL image recognition. In the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and might not have heard much about the rich set of feature engineering methods developed in pre-DL image recognition. In the
```

context of atmospheric prediction, then, let's begin by asking: How in the world did they do that *before*?

## Numerical weather prediction in a nutshell

> It is not like machine learning and/or statistics are not already used in numerical weather prediction -- on the contrary. For

Reviewer: Rather than have the double negative here, I'd just state that: _Machine learning and/or statistics are already used in numerical weather prediction._

example, every model has to start from somewhere; but raw observations are not suited to direct use as initial conditions.
Instead, they have to be assimilated to the four-dimensional *grid*[^2] over which model computations are performed. At the

> other end, namely, model output, statistical post-processing is used to refine the predictions. And very importantly, ensemble

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other end, namely, model output, statistical post-processing is used to refine the predictions. And importantly, ensemble
```

forecasts are employed to determine uncertainty.

[^2]: Four, because in addition to three spatial dimensions, there is the time dimension.

That said, the model *core*, the part that extrapolates into the future atmospheric conditions observed today, is based on a
set of differential[^3] equations, the so-called [primitive equations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primitive_equations),
that are due to the conservation laws of [momentum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservation_of_momentum),
[energy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservation_of_energy), and
[mass](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservation_of_mass). These differential equations cannot be solved analytically;

> rather, they have to be solved numerically, and that on a grid of resolution as high as possible. In that light, even deep

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rather, they have to be solved numerically on a grid of resolution as high as possible. In that light, even deep
```

Reviewer: If my edit here doesn't make sense, then I don't understand the last part of the sentence 😬

learning could appear as just "moderately resource-intensive" (dependent, though, on the model in question). So how, then,
could a DL approach look?

[^3]: mostly

## Deep learning models for weather prediction

Accompanying the benchmark dataset they created, Rasp et al.[@weatherbench] provide a set of notebooks, including one
demonstrating the use of a simple convolutional neural network to predict two of the available atmospheric variables, *500hPa

> geopotential* and *850hPa temperature*. Here *850hPa temperature* is the (spatially varying) temperature at a fix atmospheric

Reviewer: ```suggestion
geopotential* and *850hPa temperature*. Here *850hPa temperature* is the (spatially varying) temperature at a fixed atmospheric
```

height of 850hPa (\~ 1.5 kms)[^4] ; *500hPa geopotential* is proportional to the (again, spatially varying) altitude
associated with the pressure level in question (500hPa).

[^4]: Pressure and altitude are related by the [barometric equation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barometric_formula). On
    weather maps, pressure is often used to represent the vertical dimension.

For this task, two-dimensional convnets, as usually employed in image processing, are a natural fit: Image width and height
map to longitude and latitude of the spatial grid, respectively; target variables appear as channels. In this architecture,
the time series character of the data is essentially lost: Every sample stands alone, without dependency on either past or
present. In this respect, as well as given its size and simplicity, the convnet presented below is only a toy model, meant to
introduce the approach as well as the application overall. It may also serve as a *deep learning baseline*, along with two
other types of baseline commonly used in numerical weather prediction introduced below.

> Directions on how to improve on that baseline are given by recent publications. Weyn et al.[@weyn], in addition to applying

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Directions on how to improve on that baseline are given in recent publications. Weyn et al.[@weyn], in addition to applying
```

more geometrically-adequate spatial preprocessing, use a U-Net-based architecture instead of a plain convnet. Rasp and Thuerey
[@rasp2020purely], building on a fully convolutional, high-capacity ResNet architecture, add a key new procedural ingredient:
pre-training on climate models. With their method, they are able to not just compete with physical models, but also, show
evidence of the network learning about physical structure and dependencies. Unfortunately, compute facilities of this order
are not available to the average individual, which is why we'll content ourselves with demonstrating a simple toy model.

> Still, having seen a simple model in action, as well as the type of data it works on, should help a lot in understanding how

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Still, having seen a simple model in action, as well as the type of data it works on, should help in understanding how
```

DL can be used for weather prediction.

## Dataset

[Weatherbench](https://github.com/pangeo-data/WeatherBench) was explicitly created as a benchmark dataset and thus, as is
common for this species, hides a lot of preprocessing and standardization effort from the user. Atmospheric data are available
on an hourly basis, ranging from 1979 to 2018, at different spatial resolutions. Depending on resolution, there are about 15
to 20 measured variables, including temperature, geopotential, wind speed, and humidity. Of these variables, some are
available at several pressure levels. Thus, our example makes use of a small subset of available "channels". To save storage,
network and computational resources, it also operates at the smallest available resolution.

This post is accompanied by executable code on [Google
Colaboratory](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1URSjWfcnhgesHWCqd7Un5GHECYblY04r?usp=sharing), which should not just

> render unnecessary any copy-pasting of code snippets but also, allow for uncomplicated modification and experimentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
render unnecessary any copy-pasting of code snippets but also allow for uncomplicated modification and experimentation.
```

To read in and extract the data, stored as [NetCDF](https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/) files, we use
[tidync](https://docs.ropensci.org/tidync/), a high-level package built on top of
[ncdf4](https://cran.r-project.org/package=ncdf4) and [RNetCDF](https://cran.r-project.org/package=RNetCDF). Otherwise,
availability of the usual "TensorFlow family" as well as a subset of tidyverse packages is assumed.

```{r}
library(reticulate)
library(tensorflow)
library(keras)
library(tfdatasets)
library(tfautograph)

library(dplyr)
library(ggplot2)
library(tidyr)
library(purrr)
library(lubridate)

library(tidync)
```

As already alluded to, our example makes use of two spatio-temporal series: 500hPa geopotential and 850hPa temperature. The

> following commands will download and unpack the respective sets of by-year files, for a spatial resolution of 5.625 degrees:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
following commands will download and unpack the respective sets of by-year files for a spatial resolution of 5.625 degrees:
```

unzip("temperature_850_5.625deg.zip", exdir = "temperature_850")

download.file("https://dataserv.ub.tum.de/s/m1524895/download?path=%2F5.625deg%2Fgeopotential_500&files=geopotential_500_5.625deg.zip",
              "geopotential_500_5.625deg.zip")
unzip("geopotential_500_5.625deg.zip", exdir = "geopotential_500")
```

Inspecting one of those files' contents, we see that its data array is structured along three dimensions, longitude (64
different values), latitude (32) and time (8760). The data itself is `z`, the geopotential.

```{r}
tidync("geopotential_500/geopotential_500hPa_2015_5.625deg.nc") %>% hyper_array()
```

    Class: tidync_data (list of tidync data arrays)
    Variables (1): 'z'
    Dimension (3): lon,lat,time (64, 32, 8760)
    Source: /[...]/geopotential_500/geopotential_500hPa_2015_5.625deg.nc

Extraction of the data array is as easy as telling `tidync` to read the first in the list of arrays:

```{r}
z500_2015 <- (tidync("geopotential_500/geopotential_500hPa_2015_5.625deg.nc") %>%
                hyper_array())[[1]]

dim(z500_2015)
```

    [1] 64 32 8760

While we delegate further introduction to `tidync` to a comprehensive [blog

> post](https://ropensci.org/blog/2019/11/05/tidync/) on the ROpenSci website, let's at least look at a quick visualization, for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
post](https://ropensci.org/blog/2019/11/05/tidync/) on the ROpenSci website, let's at least look at a quick visualization for
```

Reviewer: (removed the comma since it's the visualization for which you're picking the first time point)

which we pick the very first time point. (Extraction and visualization code is analogous for 850hPa temperature.)

```{r}
image(z500_2015[ , , 1],
      col = hcl.colors(20, "viridis"), # for temperature, the color scheme used is YlOrRd 
      xaxt = 'n',
      yaxt = 'n',
      main = "500hPa geopotential"
)
```

> The maps show how pressure[^5] as well as temperature strongly depend on latitude. Furthermore, it's easy to spot the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The maps show how pressure[^5] and temperature strongly depend on latitude. Furthermore, it's easy to spot the
```

[atmospheric waves](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atmospheric_wave):

[^5]: Whereas we normally might think of atmospheric pressure as varying at a fixed height (for example, at sea level),
    meteorologists like to display things the other way round, displaying variable heights at fixed constant-pressure
    (isobaric) surfaces. Still, intuitively these may be read in the same way: High pressure at a given location means that
    some predefined pressure level is attained at *higher altitude* than in some low-pressure location. To be precise, these
    kinds of "inverted pressure maps" normally display *geopotential height*, measured in metres, not *geopotential*, the
    variable we're dealing with here. *Geopotential* (without the "height") refers to gravitational potential energy per unit

>     mass; it is obtained by multiplying with gravitational acceleration, and measured in metres squared per second squared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    mass; it is obtained by multiplying by gravitational acceleration, and is measured in metres squared per second squared.
```

>     Both measures are not a hundred percent equivalent, because gravitational acceleration varies with latitude and longitude

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The measures are not a hundred percent equivalent, because gravitational acceleration varies with latitude and longitude
```

Reviewer: Since you're talking about equivalence, I think the both is implied. 👍

  
  keras_model_custom(name = name, function(self) {
    self$pad_width <- pad_width
    
    function (x, mask = NULL) {
      x <- if (self$pad_width == 0) {
        x
      } else {
        lon_dim <- dim(x)[3]
        pad_width <- tf$cast(self$pad_width, tf$int32)
        # wrap around for longitude
        tf$concat(list(x[, ,-pad_width:lon_dim,],
                       x,
                       x[, , 1:pad_width,]),
                  axis = 2L) %>%
          tf$pad(list(
            list(0L, 0L),
            # zero-pad for latitude
            list(pad_width, pad_width),
            list(0L, 0L),
            list(0L, 0L)
          ))
      }
    }
  })
}

periodic_conv_2d <- function(filters,
                             kernel_size,
                             name = NULL) {
  
  keras_model_custom(name = name, function(self) {
    self$padding <- periodic_padding_2d(pad_width = (kernel_size - 1) / 2)
    self$conv <-
      layer_conv_2d(filters = filters,
                    kernel_size = kernel_size,
                    padding = 'valid')
    
    function (x, mask = NULL) {
      x %>% self$padding() %>% self$conv()
    }
  })
}
```

> For our purposes of establishing a deep learning baseline that is fast to train, CNN architecture and parameter defaults are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our purposes of establishing a deep-learning baseline that is fast to train, CNN architecture and parameter defaults are
```

reached early, after training for just two epochs).

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE, layout="l-body-outset", fig.cap = "MSE per epoch on training and validation sets."}
knitr::include_graphics("images/history.png")
```

This is not too surprising though, given the model's architectural simplicity and modest size.

## Evaluation

Here, we first present two other baselines, which -- given a highly complex and chaotic system like the atmosphere -- may
sound irritatingly simple and yet, be pretty hard to beat. The metric used for comparison is *latitudinally weighted
root-mean-square error*. Latitudinal weighting up-weights the lower latitudes and down-weights the upper ones.

```{r}
deg2rad <- function(d) {
  (d / 180) * pi
}

lats <- tidync("geopotential_500/geopotential_500hPa_2015_5.625deg.nc")$transforms$lat %>%
  select(lat) %>%
  pull()

lat_weights <- cos(deg2rad(lats))
lat_weights <- lat_weights / mean(lat_weights)

weighted_rmse <- function(forecast, ground_truth) {
  error <- (forecast - ground_truth) ^ 2
  for (i in seq_along(lat_weights)) {
    error[, i, ,] <- error[, i, ,] * lat_weights[i]
  }
  apply(error, 4, mean) %>% sqrt()
}
```

#### Baseline 1: Weekly climatology

> In general, climatology refers to long-term averages, computed over defined time ranges. Here, we first calculate weekly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, climatology refers to long-term averages computed over defined time ranges. Here, we first calculate weekly
```

This post is accompanied by executable code on [Google
Colaboratory](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1URSjWfcnhgesHWCqd7Un5GHECYblY04r?usp=sharing), which should not just
render unnecessary any copy-pasting of code snippets but also, allow for uncomplicated modification and experimentation.

To read in and extract the data, stored as [NetCDF](https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/) files, we use
[tidync](https://docs.ropensci.org/tidync/), a high-level package built on top of
[ncdf4](https://cran.r-project.org/package=ncdf4) and [RNetCDF](https://cran.r-project.org/package=RNetCDF). Otherwise,
availability of the usual "TensorFlow family" as well as a subset of tidyverse packages is assumed.

```{r}
library(reticulate)
library(tensorflow)
library(keras)
library(tfdatasets)
library(tfautograph)

library(dplyr)
library(ggplot2)
library(tidyr)
library(purrr)
library(lubridate)

library(tidync)
```

As already alluded to, our example makes use of two spatio-temporal series: 500hPa geopotential and 850hPa temperature. The
following commands will download and unpack the respective sets of by-year files, for a spatial resolution of 5.625 degrees:

```{r}

> system('wget "https://dataserv.ub.tum.de/s/m1524895/download?path=%2F5.625deg%2Fgeopotential_500&files=geopotential_500_5.625deg.zip" \\

Reviewer 2: would you consider using `download.file` and `dir.create` etc. This doesn't run on Windows...

Author: oh, right :-) it's fine on Colab but not everywhere else ;-)

      periodic_conv_2d(filters = filters[3], kernel_size = kernel_size[3])
    self$act3 <- layer_activation_leaky_relu()
    self$drop3 <- layer_dropout(rate = dropout[3])
    self$conv4 <-
      periodic_conv_2d(filters = filters[4], kernel_size = kernel_size[4])
    self$act4 <- layer_activation_leaky_relu()
    self$drop4 <- layer_dropout(rate = dropout[4])
    self$conv5 <-
      periodic_conv_2d(filters = filters[5], kernel_size = kernel_size[5])
    
    function (x, mask = NULL) {
      x %>%
        self$conv1() %>%
        self$act1() %>%
        self$drop1() %>%
        self$conv2() %>%
        self$act2() %>%
        self$drop2() %>%
        self$conv3() %>%
        self$act3() %>%
        self$drop3() %>%
        self$conv4() %>%
        self$act4() %>%
        self$drop4() %>%
        self$conv5()
    }
  })
}

model <- periodic_cnn()
```

## Training

In that same spirit of "default-ness", we train with MSE loss and Adam optimizer.

```{r}
loss <- tf$keras$losses$MeanSquaredError(reduction = tf$keras$losses$Reduction$SUM)
optimizer <- optimizer_adam()

train_loss <- tf$keras$metrics$Mean(name='train_loss')

valid_loss <- tf$keras$metrics$Mean(name='test_loss')

> train_step <- function(train_batch) {

Reviewer 2: it doesn't seem to me that we are using any custom training logic. Why not just using `keras %>% fit`?

Author: Historically, this never worked (using custom models with `fit` in TF 2.0+...) 

I just tried again and get the error
```
RuntimeError: Evaluation error: unused argument (training = TRUE). 
```

Honestly, I also think that one can't show this method often enough as it seems like it never got used much outside some small group ... just like custom models themselves ... (although who knows, depending on whether/how the new TF 2.3 pass-in-your-custom-logic will work from R, perhaps that kind of flexibility could be achieved even easier at some point...)

  time_parts_train[, "second"]
)

isoweeks_train <- map(iso_train, isoweek) %>% unlist()

train_by_week <- apply(train_all, c(2, 3, 4), function(x) {
  tapply(x, isoweeks_train, function(y) {
    mean(y)
  })
})

dim(train_by_week)
```

    53 32 64 2

Step two then runs through the test set, mapping dates to corresponding ISO weeks and associating the weekly averages from the
training set:

```{r}
test_file <- "geopotential_500/geopotential_500hPa_2017_5.625deg.nc"

times_test <- (tidync(test_file) %>% activate("D2") %>% hyper_array())$time

time_unit_test <- ncmeta::nc_atts(test_file, "time") %>%
  tidyr::unnest(cols = c(value)) %>%
  dplyr::filter(name == "units")

time_parts_test <- RNetCDF::utcal.nc(time_unit_test$value, times_test)

iso_test <- ISOdate(
  time_parts_test[, "year"],
  time_parts_test[, "month"],
  time_parts_test[, "day"],
  time_parts_test[, "hour"],
  time_parts_test[, "minute"],
  time_parts_test[, "second"]
)

isoweeks_test <- map(iso_test, isoweek) %>% unlist()

climatology_forecast <- test_all

for (i in 1:dim(climatology_forecast)[1]) {
  week <- isoweeks_test[i]
  lookup <- train_by_week[week, , , ]
  climatology_forecast[i, , ,] <- lookup
}

```

> For this baseline, the latitudinally-weighted RMSE amounts to roughly 98 for geopotential and 4 for temperature.

Reviewer 2: I think there's a typo in 98? Shouldn't it be 980?

Author: thanks, right! i had changed geopotential height to geopotential, now i need to add the last digit back in...
